Savings are the surplus of income over expenditure. a. Income- Money earned from various sources like Salary, Wages, etc. b. Expenditure- Money spent on various items which include essential and nonessential items. People usually meet their short term goals with savings. Money in savings account of a bank earns a small amount of interest and it is easy to withdraw it whenever needed. People can save in savings bank accounts, Post Office savings accounts, etc.
Investment is the act of deployment of money out of savings into financial or non-financial products with the expectation of earning higher returns over a period of time. The various products in which investments may be done are financial products viz. fixed deposit in bank, buying shares in stock market, investing in Mutual funds, etc. and non-financial products viz. purchase of land, gold, silver, etc. The investments may be done for short term, medium term or longterm. While investing one should always remember that return on investments may rise or fall over time and it is quite normal for that to happen.
Items that you own and have economic value are your assets and items which you owe to others or have borrowed from others are your liabilities. For example, if you save and then invest in a fixed deposit, it is your asset. On the other hand, if you borrow funds/ take a loan from a bank or any individual, it is your liability.
Inflation refers to rise in prices of goods and services. Over a period of time, as the cost of goods and services increases, the ability of a unit of money, say one rupee, to buy goods and services keeps declining. In other words, the Purchasing Power of money, i.e. ability of money to buy anything, decreases. It is important to take into account the effects of inflation on your investments during financial planning. Investors greatly fear inflation since it reduces the value of their investment.
A Vada Pav costing ₹2/- five years ago would now cost ₹7/-. This increase in the price is not as a result of higher quantity or a better quality of the Vada Pav, but due to inflation impacting the prices of the ingredients and finally the end product.
Try to determine your "real rate of return”, or the return you can expect after factoring in the effects of inflation. To reduce the risk of decrease in the value of money, you can invest the money available to you today at a rate equal or higher than the rate of inflation.
With simple interest, you can earn interest only on the principal (that is, the amount you initially invested); while with compounding interest, you earn interest on the principal as well as, previously earned interest.
Principal amount is changing at the end of every year on account of addition of return earned for that year to the principal. As principal is increasing every year, the return earned on increased principal also is increasing.
Financial planning is the process of estimating financial needs of a person and implementing a comprehensive plan to meet those financial needs during his or her lifetime through investment. For instance, birth of a child, education, purchasing house, marriage, meeting emergency situations like an illness, to meet the impact of an accident, death, or natural calamities like flood, etc.
Your net worth indicates your capacity to achieve your financial goals, such as buying a home, paying for university education, future medical expenses, repayment of loan, etc
Your financial goals can range from acquiring assets, saving for emergency as well as making investments for your future financial security. The financial goals of an individual can be categorized as below: a. Basic financial goals (food, clothing, shelter, etc.) b. Secondary or advanced financial goals (education, house, marriage, etc.) c. Retirement planning d. Estate planning Individuals can use a variety of investment, risk management and tax planning strategies to meet their financial goals. These goals change over an individual's lifetime and accordingly the financial plan should be reviewed on a regular basis for any modification as per change in the circumstances. TIP: While making financial plans, one should first ensure a planned savings amount and then plan for meeting expenses. Mr. Warren Buffett, one of world’s successful investor, has said: - “Don’t save what is left after spending; spend what is left after saving.” Therefore, the basic concept that everyone should focus upon while utilising his income is as follows: Income – Savings = Expenditure
Wealth is not built overnight. One needs to set specific financial goals. A good financial goal should be SMART i.e. Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Timebound.
Five-Step Approach to Achieve Financial Goals STEP 1: Identify specific financial goals It is important to prepare a proper plan to fix each investment with a specific goal. It is very important to identify one’s financial goals and aspirations and estimate the amount of money it would be needed to fulfil them. STEP 2: Classify goals into Short-term, Medium term or Long term • Short-term goals are typically financial requirements that are expected to arise in time period ranging from a few months to one year. • Medium-term goals may have a time horizon of one year to eight years. Goals like buying a property, starting your own venture, getting enrolled in a professional course, etc. can be medium-term financial goals. • Long-term goals may have a time horizon of eight years or more for example child's marriage, retirement planning, etc.
STEP 3: Decide upon asset-allocation Asset-Allocation is a strategy for investing your money into various asset classes such as equity and debt that would suit an investor's income and risk appetite. Asset Classes may be referred to groups of financial instruments which have similar financial characteristics. Asset Allocation refers to an investment strategy that aims to balance risk and reward - in the form of returns - by dividing the assets of an individual’s portfolio according to his/her financial goals, risk tolerance and investment horizon. Asset Allocation Allocate assets depending on your age, lifestyle, family commitments and your financial goals. While allocating your funds, distribute your investments across various asset classes such as equity, bonds, real estate, etc., to benefit from diversification, which helps reduce risk and increases the possibility of earning moderate to high returns on your investments.
For example: An individual’s portfolio when he/she invests in various asset classes (depending upon his financial goals, risk appetite, investment horizon, etc.) may look like any of the following:
STEP 4: Choose the right investments with diversification (within asset classes) Arriving at the right risk-return combination and choosing the right asset allocation can seem difficult. For a longer term goal, it is advisable to focus on maximizing returns with diversified asset allocation.
It refers to the process which reduces risk by making investments into various financial instruments, industries and other categories. It aims to minimize loss on return by investing in different asset classes (debt, equity, gold, real assets, etc.) that would react differently to the same event, such as those relating to the economy or markets. Although diversification does not provide guarantee against loss, it is the most important component for reaching long-term financial goals while minimizing risk.
STEP 5: Review and revise financial plans. To stay on track, regularly review the progress towards your goals and investments. Review your investments like stocks and mutual funds in your portfolio. Certain products may seem tailor-made for specific needs, but they may not be actually useful for one's portfolio. Be aware of such investment options
C. Choosing Investment Options & Understanding Risk The investment products available for an investor are fixed income securities, equity investments, mutual funds, etc. Every asset class has its own risk and return. Investments in equities are considered as high risk investments as their returns are subject to performance of individual companies and general economic scenario. On the other hand, investments in the debt instruments are considered having relatively low risk. For instance, Government bonds are considered to be effectively "risk free" due to the trust that government will not default on the repayment to investors. Three pillars of investment - The investment decision by an individual is influenced by safety, liquidity and return. They are called the three pillars of investment. i. Safety: This is about how well protected the principal and return on the investment is. For instance, if you lend ₹100/- to someone, will it be repaid on time? Or, is your capital of ₹100/- safe? Safety means your money invested is protected and there is every possibility that on the agreed date, or maybe even before, it would be returned whenever needed. ii. Liquidity: This pillar of investment is the degree of ease with which you can encash or liquidate your investment at fair value. In the above example, it will be about how soon will you get your money back if you need it immediately? iii. Return: What is the return you will get on your investments? It could be in the form of income, appreciation of capital invested or both. Income means an investment's earnings in the form of interest or dividend payment. Capital appreciation means the increase in market value of investment over a period of time.
For example, if the present market value is higher than the value at the time of investment, it is called appreciation or gain. In case the market value is lower than the value at the time of investment, it is called depreciation or loss. D. Returns from Investment Returns from Investment can be described as money made by an investor on his/ her investment. The returns can be in two ways as explained below: Regular Income • Equity Investment: You get dividend when you buy and hold equity shares of a company and units of equity mutual fund. • Fixed Income Investment: In debt securities, you receive fixed interest on interest bearing Investments Capital Appreciation • When the value of initial investment increases over a period of time and the investor benefits by selling part or whole of the investment at the increased value, it is called Capital Appreciation. Example of Capital Appreciation: An investor bought 100 shares of company XYZ Ltd. at ₹50/- per share by paying ₹5,000/- in total. When the value of XYZ share increases to ₹65/- per share, and the investor sells 100 shares in the market, he or she will get 6,500 (100 Shares at ₹65/- per share). The investor stands to gain ₹1500/- from the initial investment that he has made. This is called capital appreciation/capital gain. E. What are Risks and Returns? Risk can be defined as the probability or likelihood of a loss occurring in relation to your expected returns from any particular investment. It is a measure of the level of uncertainty of achieving the returns as per investor expectations.
Risk and investing go hand in hand. The good news is that "risk" comes with the potential for "rewards" from investing — which is what makes the whole process worthwhile.
Tips: Once you invest in any asset class you should monitor your investments on a regular basis and keep yourself updated about various market happenings to take corrective action. Always check the potential risks and do proper due diligence when promised returns are usually high.
A.	Why to keep money in banks? Drawbacks of keeping cash at home are mentioned as below: • Unsafe – Money can be stolen or lost due to natural calamities • Loss of growth opportunities - Loss of interest income • No/Low credit eligibility - Deposit in banks creates eligibility for taking loans
B.	Banking Commercial banks are regulated financial institutions as they deal with public money and trust. Commercial banks in India are regulated by Reserve Bank of India. Banks are required to go through mandatory inspection and audits at various intervals and are also audited by the Reserve Bank of India every year. Bank deposits are comparatively lower risk investments. Banks offer various types of deposits, depending on the needs of the customers. Bank deposits are preferred more for their liquidity and safety than for the returns. It is also possible to get loans from banks against fixed deposits up to 75 to 90 % of the deposit amount. Central Government deposit insurance scheme ensures that all deposits are insured by the Government up to a limit of ₹5 lakhs per customer in that particular bank. So, even in case of a failure of a bank, depositors are assured that the Government will step in and return up to ₹5 lakhs of their savings in that bank. For complete details on the scheme, one can refer the website of Reserve Bank of India, from time to time
C.	Account Opening Process — Know Your Client (KYC) Norms For opening any type of bank account, customers need to undergo the process of complying with KYC norms. KYC Stands for "Know Your Customer". The objective of KYC is to enable banks to know and understand their customers better and help them manage their risks prudently. The KYC documents generally accepted by banks are: Photograph, Document for proof of identity (copy of PAN Card, Aadhaar Card, etc.) and Document for proof of address (copy of electricity bill, driving license, passport, Aadhaar card, etc).
D.	Types of Bank Accounts
Types of Bank Deposit and their Key Features Savings Bank (SB) Account • Low interest, however, highly liquid. • Facilitates payment mechanism through Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). • No Tax deducted at Source (TDS) on interest on SB account balance, but taxable in the hands of depositor. • Account can be opened in single name or joint names. In the case of joint account, the operation of the account can be done by any one account holder or jointly. • Minors of any age can also open a savings bank account through their natural or legally appointed guardian. Minors above age of 10 years can also avail additional banking facilities like internet banking, ATM/ debit card, cheque book facility, etc. Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account (BSBDA) • Introduced to promote financial inclusion. • Zero balance savings account without any requirement of an initial deposit can be opened for individuals and also minors (through their guardian). • Relaxed conditions for number of deposits/ withdrawals in a month. • ATM Card, passbooks are issued free of charge. • BSDBA account holders are not eligible for opening any other savings bank deposit account in that bank. Fixed Deposit (FD) Account • Involves placing funds with the bank for a fixed term at a certain interest rate. • Interest accrued or earned on FD is subject to Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) beyond a stipulated amount. • Senior citizens may get extra benefits on the interest rate. • Tenure and rate of interest on FDs varies from bank to bank. Recurring Deposit (RD) Account • A fixed amount is deposited at monthly intervals for a predetermined term. • Earns higher interest than savings bank account. • TDS applicable on interest accrued or earned beyond a stipulated amount. • Senior citizens may get extra benefits on the interest rate. • Tenure and rate of interest on RDs varies from bank to bank. Special Bank Term Deposit Scheme • Tax savings scheme available with banks. • Relief under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961. • Term deposit with 5 years lock in period. • No premature withdrawal/loan allowed.
E.	Digital Banking In the modern era, transactions including payments, fund transfers and buying goods, all take place on digital platforms, such as mobile phones. Customers can perform transactions from any place.
The various digital modes of transferring funds are as follows: Mode of Transfer and Key Features NEFT (National Electronic Fund Transfer) - Transfer of funds from one Bank account to another. - No restrictions on the minimum/ maximum amount for transfer. - Transfer is done using beneficiary's account number and IFSC Code (Indian Financial System Code, a unique code assigned to each bank branch) - Charges for transfer may differ from bank to bank. - Transfer of funds can be initiated any time during the day and it takes few hours to get credited in the beneficiary account. RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement) - Transfer of funds from one Bank account to a different account of another bank on a real time basis. - Used to make high value transactions. - Transfer is done using beneficiary's account number and IFSC Code (Indian Financial System Code, a unique code assigned to each bank branch). - Charges for transfer may differ from bank to bank. - Transfer of funds can be initiated during the specified period on working day and is completed instantly on a real time basis. IMPS (Immediate Payment Service) - Transfer of funds from one Bank account to another facilitating instant fund transfer. - For fund transfer through internet banking, beneficiary's account number and IFSC Code (Indian Financial Services Code, a unique code assigned to each bank branch) are needed. - For fund transfer through mobile banking, beneficiary's MMID (Mobile Money Identifier is a 7 digit number issued by bank to the customer) is needed. Unified Payment Interface (UPI) - Instant transfer of funds through any smart phone using VPA (Virtual Payment Address). - 24 x 7 fund transfer facility on a real time basis. - One needs to download UPI-enabled bank app and login using bank details

New Categories of Banks and Business Correspondents:
Title Key Features Payment Bank - Provides savings account/ current account facilities. - Can accept demand deposit but not recurring/ fixed deposit. - Can issue ATM/ Debit Cards but not credit cards. - Cannot give loans/ advances. - Offer payment and remittance service through various channels. Small Finance Bank - Provides features like taking small deposits and disbursing small amount loans. - Instrument to save funds primarily to unserved and underserved sections of population. - Extend loans of small amount to small business units, micro and small enterprises, small and marginal farmers and entities in the unorganized sectors. Business Correspondent - Representative of a bank who goes to customers (usually in remote locations/ villages) to help them with their banking needs/ transactions. - Can provide services like opening of bank accounts, deposits, transfer of funds, collection of loan deposits, disbursal of small value credit, collection of payment/ fees, etc.
Digital Payments - Do's and Don'ts
DO’S DON'Ts Use a password for your computer, laptop and mobile so that no one else can access your systems without your consent. Change your passwords and security settings regularly.  Never save your mobile banking login ID and password on the phone. Either memorize it or write it down somewhere else that is safe and not accessible to anyone. Always visit your bank's secure Internet Banking website directly. Avoid using Internet Banking on unsecured WI-FI networks such as railway stations, airports, cybercafés, etc. Never leave your handset unattended and logged into a mobile banking app or internet banking account or while carrying out any financial transaction. Log out of your Internet Banking/ Mobile Banking application immediately after you have completed your transaction and before closing the window.  Never ignore your account balance statements and transaction history.  Update the mobile banking app as and when a new version/ or upgrade is released. Also update your phone with latest security systems and software. Don't keep your PC or laptop lying around when not in use or trust a stranger to use it. 
 
What is a Credit card and a Debit card? Credit card gives the card holder the benefit of availing credit facility for a certain period of time for example making payments without having immediate money in hand in the form of credit card transactions. Debit card, on the other hand, is a card issued to a bank account holder for withdrawing money at ATMs from his account as well as to make payment at point of sale. All the merchant establishments accept debit cards in settlement of transactions. Both credit and debit cards can be used for withdrawal of cash from ATMs as well as for digital transactions.
Comparison between a credit card and a debit card are listed as below: Particulars Credit Card Debit Card Source of funds Lending bank provides the credit facility Linked to one's own savings/ current account maintained with the same bank Interest If outstanding amount is not paid on time, interest is levied. Not applicable Credit History Relevant for issuing a credit card Not relevant for issuance of the debit card. Relationship with the issuer No compulsion to have account with issuing bank Having an account with the issuing bank is a pre-requisite
Things to keep in mind while transacting through ATM card: • Change the PIN immediately when the card is received from bank. • Don't write down your PIN number anywhere. Memorize it. Don't disclose your PIN number to any third person. • Preferably use an ATM within bank premises or premises which are manned 24*7 by a security guard. Use it personally. Bank has no liability in case the ATM card has been handed over for transaction to any other person except the account holder. • While using the online transaction, use the virtual keyboard. • Register yourself with bank for getting SMS alerts on transactions. However, banks may charge customers for providing SMS or e-mail alerts related to their bank accounts.
Change your PIN numbers as often as convenient. • If the card is lost, immediately inform the bank. • Do not allow anyone to access or use your card.
RBI has specified that a customer has no liability when an unauthorized transaction happens on account of fraud, contributory negligence or deficiency on part of the bank. Similarly, even when neither the customer nor the bank is at fault, but the problem lies elsewhere in the system, the customer does not have any liability, provided he/she notifies the bank about the unauthorized or illegal operation within three days of receiving an alert from the bank. And the bank shall credit the amount involved in such transaction to the customer's account within a specified time period. However, in cases where such fraud takes place on account of the negligence of the customer, the entire loss, until the date of reporting the unlawful transaction, will be borne by the customer. RBI has emphasized banks that they need to send SMS and e-mail alerts to the customers immediately after a transaction is carried out in their account. They have been instructed to ensure that such messages are enabled to carry the customer's reply too, so that a customer can report any such fraud immediately
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the central bank of India, was established on April 1, 1935, under the Reserve Bank of India Act. The Reserve Bank of India uses monetary policy to create financial stability in India, and it is charged with regulating the country's currency and credit systems. The main purpose of RBI is to conduct consolidated supervision of the financial sector in India, which is made up of commercial banks, financial institutions and nonbanking finance companies. It formulates, implements and monitors India's monetary policy. The central bank's management objective is to maintain price stability and ensure that credit is flowing to productive economic sectors. RBI acts as a regulator and supervisor of the overall banking system and it is also the banker to the Government of India. RBI is also the lender of last resort for all commercial banks.

What are the pre-requisites to invest in securities? In order to invest in equity shares, an investor should have three accounts: • Savings Account – Saving bank account with a commercial bank • Trading Account - Trading account with a SEBI registered stock broker of a recognized stock exchange to buy or sell securities on the Stock Exchange • Demat Account - Demat account with a SEBI recognized Depository Participant (DP) of Depository for holding securities in dematerialized/electronic form

The Demat account can be opened with depository participant (DP) of any of the Depository. National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL) and Central Depository Services (India) Ltd. (CDSL) are two SEBI registered depositories in India. The list of SEBI registered stock brokers and depository participants may be obtained from SEBI’s official website (www.sebi.gov.in) or from the websites of the respective stock exchanges & depositories.

When a company publicly issues new stocks and bonds for the first time, it does so in the primary market. In many cases, this takes the form of an initial public offer (IPO). SEBI examines the prospectus issued to the public for subscription of shares to see that it meets with the requirements of the SEBI Regulations. Companies issuing securities via the primary market hire merchant bankers who, on behalf of the company, prepare the prospectus and ensure related compliance for the issue of shares viz. finalization of allotment process, listing of shares in the stock exchanges, etc.

For the purpose of opening of Demat and trading account with a Depository Participant (DP)/Stock broker, the investor has to complete Know Your Client (KYC) process with the respective DP/Stock Broker. KYC is mandatory under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and Rules framed there under. Investor has to submit Officially Valid Documents (OVDs) as proof of identity and proof of address such as PAN card / Unique Identification (UID) (Aadhaar)/ Passport/ Voter ID card/ Driving license, etc. KYC process may be done online through Aadhaar based EKYC mechanism or offline by visiting or sending the documents to the registered address of the intermediary
Once you have opened an account with a stock broker, you can buy or sell shares of a company through a stock broker of the recognized stock exchange where the shares are listed and traded. You can place order to buy or sell securities with your broker using the online trading account by visiting broker's website, mobile trading app of broker, through the phone using Call & Trade facility or physically visiting their office.

Word of Caution Buying or selling of shares shall always be done through a SEBI registered stock broker.

Trading days and Trading & Settlement Cycle Trading on the stock exchange takes place on all days of the week (except Saturdays and Sundays and holidays declared by the Stock Exchange in advance). In case of purchase of shares, investors are required to make payment to the bank account of your stock broker prior to the pay-in day for the relevant settlement. Once payment is made by the investor, the broker would credit the shares in the Demat account of investor after pay-out day. Similarly, in case of sale of shares, investors are required to deliver the shares to Demat account of broker prior to the pay-in day for the relevant settlement. Once the shares are delivered by the investor, the broker would credit the funds in the bank account of investor after pay-out day.

What is the pay-in day and pay-out day? Pay-in day is the day when the brokers shall make payment of funds (in case of purchase of shares) or delivery of securities (in case of sale of shares) to the stock exchange. Payout day is the day when the stock exchange makes payment of funds (in case of sale of shares) or delivery of securities (in case of purchase of shares) to the broker. Settlement cycle is on T+2 rolling settlement basis w.e.f. April 01, 2003 (where T stands for the trade day). For example, trades executed on a Monday are typically settled on the following Wednesday (considering 2 working days from the trade day). The funds and securities pay-in and pay-out are carried out on T+2 day. The exchanges have to ensure that the pay-out of funds and securities to the clients is done by the broker within 24 hours of the pay-out.

A mutual fund pools in money from many investors and invests the money in stocks, bonds, short-term money-market instruments, other securities or assets, or some combination of these investments. All mutual funds are required to be registered with SEBI before they launch any scheme.

Mutual funds are segregated in different categories based on the objectives of the mutual fund scheme. The schemes are designed to keep in mind the needs of various types of investors, risk averse investors (basically a conservative Investor who does not want to take high risk), moderate investors (investors who can take some amount of risk) and aggressive investors (investors who are willing to take risk in search of higher returns)

An SIP or a Systematic Investment Plan allows an investor to invest a fixed amount of money regularly in a mutual fund scheme. It lets you set aside a fixed sum of money at regular intervals (weekly, monthly or quarterly) with an objective to gain capital appreciation in the longer run. SIP investment inculcates the habit of savings. Instead of trying to time the market, by investing on a regular basis, the investor benefits from the rupee-cost averaging factor. As the investments are done over different market cycles, the investor benefits from the market volatility by getting to buy more units of the same fund when the markets are low and buying less units when the prices are high. An investor can invest a pre-determined fixed amount as low as ₹500/- in a scheme every month or quarter, depending on his/her convenience through post-dated cheques, through Standing instruction (SI) facility or through ECS (Electronic Clearing Service) facility. Investors need to fill up an application form and SIP mandate form on which they need to indicate their choice for the SIP date (basically when the pre-determined amount will be invested). Subsequent SIPs may be auto-debited through a standing instruction, electronic clearing service or post-dated cheques.
There are three types of contracts in commodity derivatives market. These are Forward Contracts, Futures Contract and Options. Forward contract is an agreement between two parties to sell or buy a certain commodity at a fixed price in the future. This contract hedges the risk for the buyer against price fluctuations and the seller can get a guaranteed price for his product at a specified date. Forward contracts are traded over the counter, while futures contracts are traded on the commodity derivatives exchanges. Forward contracts can be privately negotiated. Futures contract have a standardized way of execution and the transaction is guaranteed by the clearing house of a recognized commodity derivative exchange which minimizes the risk of defaults on the settlement of transaction.
Investors are charged a premium when they buy an options contract. On expiry of the contract, generally the transaction is cash settled instead of actually buying/selling the underlying security unlike in the cash market. Hence, many investors find Futures & Options (F&O) cheaper to trade, however, it is riskier than the cash segment because F&O is time dependent and you cannot hold on to the contract till the desired time i.e. when the market is favourable to earn positive returns. On the expiry of the contract, even if you cash settle the contract instead of taking delivery, the change in value of the underlying will be either credited or debited to your account.
Insurance Insurance allows individuals, businesses and other entities to protect themselves against significant potential losses and financial hardship at a reasonably affordable cost. Insurance is a form of risk management, primarily used to manage the risk of an uncertain future loss. Thus, insurance is a promise of compensation for specific potential future losses in exchange for a periodic payment called premium. An entity which provides insurance is known as the insurer. A person who buys insurance is known as an insured or the policy holder. The insured receives a contract called the insurance policy which contains details like the conditions and circumstances under which the insured will be financially compensated along with other details related to the insurance policy. The insurance policies are generally classified into the following:
Life Insurance - Term Insurance - In event of your unfortunate demise during the policy term, your nominees will receive the “Sum Assured” which you had selected while purchasing the plan. - Active for a fixed period of time (popularly referred to as the "term of the policy"). Life Insurance - Endowment Insurance - A life insurance contract designed to pay a lump sum amount after a specific term (on the maturity of the policy) or on death of the policy holder (insured). - Typical maturities of insurance policies are ten, fifteen or twenty years up to a certain age limit. Some policies also pay out in the case of critical illness. Life Insurance - Whole Life - Type of life insurance policy which stays active as long as you pay the premiums. Life Insurance – Unit Linked insurance - Combination of insurance and an investment vehicle. - A portion of the premium paid by the policyholder is utilized to provide insurance coverage to the policyholder and the remaining portion invested in equity and debt instruments. Personal Accidental cover policy - Insurance plan which provides monetary compensation in the event of bodily injuries or disability or death caused solely by accident. Motor Insurance - Insurance for cars, trucks, motorcycles and other road vehicles. - Also called as vehicle insurance, car insurance or auto insurance.
Health Insurance - Insurance coverage that covers the cost of an insured individual's medical and surgical expenses. - The "insured" is the owner of the health insurance policy or the person with the health insurance coverage. Travel Insurance - Insurance for covering against travel risks such as lost or stolen luggage, cancellation cover (if you are not able to travel due to unexpected medical reasons) and most importantly, unexpected medical costs abroad. - Comprehensive travel insurance policy will provide: • Emergency medical cover • Losses incurred due to unforeseen cancellations or having to cut your trip short • Death and disability cover • Personal liability cover • Luggage cover Property Insurance - Policy that provides financial reimbursement to the owner or renter of a structure and its contents in the event of damage or theft. - Property insurance can include homeowner’s insurance, renters insurance, flood insurance and earthquake insurance. Group Insurance - Insurance policy that covers a defined group of people, for example the members of a society or professional association or the employees of a particular employer.
Pension Services Pension may be described as a regular payment which one aspires to receive regularly, once the person retires from his regular occupation/ job or attain a certain age from which he/ she does not want to work. Pension plans provide financial security and stability during old age when people don't have a regular source of income. Retirement planning ensures that people live with pride and without compromising on their standard of living, during later part of their life. Pension schemes give an opportunity to invest and accumulate savings and get lump sum amount as regular income through annuity plan on retirement.
Being a Pensioner • No need to open separate account for pension. • Existing account can be used for receiving pension. • Pension account can be transferred to another branch or different bank. • Do remember to submit your ‘Life Certificate’ to your bank branch in November, every year • “Jeevan Pramaan'’ – Digital Life Certificate using Aadhaar and mobile at: www.jeevanpramaan.gov.in.
Procedure to transfer person's wealth and assets after his or her death After the demise of an individual, his or her legal heirs have to approach various authorities (like banks, depositories, mutual fund companies and Insurance companies) with their claim on the deceased assets. They have to present the death certificate along with legal heir's certificate to these authorities to transfer the assets of the deceased in their name. If the deceased has made a Will, the assets and the wealth of the deceased will be distributed as per his or her Will. In the absence of a Will, the transfer will be made only to legal heirs.
Borrowing is an act of taking money and paying it back over a period. In meeting financial goals, in case the savings are inadequate, one resorts to borrowing. Borrowing provides the flexibility of repaying in small instalments over a period of time. Equated Monthly Instalments (EMI) is a very popuar mode of repayment of loan.
List of Documents required for obtaining Loans: • Proof of Identity:- Passport/ Aadhaar card/ Driving License / Voters ID / PAN Card (any one) • Proof of Residence: - Aadhaar Card/ Leave and License Agreement / Utility Bill (not more than 3 months old) / Passport (any one). • Latest 3 months bank statement (where salary or income is credited). • Salary slips for last 3 months • 2 passport size photographs • Collateral proofs
Collateral is a property or other asset that a borrower offers as a security to the lender in exchange of availing the loan. If the borrower stops making the promised loan repayments, the lender can seize the assets financed and the collateral to cover its losses. A lender's claim to a borrower's collateral is called a lien.
Different Type of Loans Available The banking institutions provide various types of loans to individuals and business community such as: Scheme and Key Features Personal Loan This loan can be utilized for any purpose, for example, paying debt, marriage expenses or vacation expenditure. No collateral security is required for this type of loan. Vehicle Loan This loan is issued for the purpose of purchasing new or second-hand vehicles for personal and commercial uses. Education Loan Education loan is required for students and family to meet the financial goal of higher education. Students should have an admission offer from an institution before they apply for education loan.
Gold Loan Gold loan is given only on providing gold as a security to a bank or any other lending institution. Housing Loan Housing Loans are taken by people for a variety of house-related purposes such as construction of a house, house renovation, extension of house, buying of property or land, etc. Agriculture Loan Agriculture Loans are provided to farmers to fund agricultural operations or related activities like horticulture, sericulture, etc. Consumer Durable Loans Consumer Durable Loans are the loans which may be availed for purchasing of consumer durables like television, refrigerator, etc.
5 Cs in Credit — One Stop Guide to get your Loan Sanctioned The banks generally follow a conservative approach for processing the loan request of the borrowers. In this analysis, banks consider five elements and these are known as 5 Cs in credit. These are as follows: Capacity: The prospective lender will want to know exactly how you intend to and what is your capacity to repay the loan. Character: Lender will form a subjective opinion as to whether or not you are sufficiently trustworthy to repay the loan or generate a return on funds invested in your company. Capital: Capital is the money you personally have invested in the business and is an indication of how much you have at risk, should the business fail. Collateral: Banks insist on taking a security in addition to that is created out of loan proceeds. Conditions: Banks analyse the intended purpose of availing the loan like will the money be used for working capital, additional equipment or inventory, among others.
Credit Score Credit information agencies play a vital role in decision making in loan application process. After an applicant fills out the application form and hands it over to the lender, the lender first checks the credit score and credit report of the applicant. If the credit score is low, the lender may not even consider the application further and reject it at that point. If the credit score is high, the lender will look into the application and consider other details to determine if the applicant is credit-worthy. The credit score works as a first impression for the lender, the higher the score, the better are your chances of the loan being reviewed and approved. The decision to lend is solely dependent on the lender and credit score or credit report does not in any manner decide if the loan or credit card should be sanctioned or not. Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd (CIBIL) is India's first credit information company, also commonly referred as a credit bureau. CIBIL collects and maintains records of individuals' and non-individuals' (commercial entities) payments pertaining to loans and credit cards. These records are submitted to CIBIL by banks and other lenders on a monthly basis; using this information a Credit Information Report (CIR) and credit score is developed, enabling lenders to evaluate and approve loan applications. A credit bureau is licensed by the RBI and governed by the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act of 2005. The Reserve Bank of India requires all credit bureaus to give one free full credit report, every year, to all consumers.
Tips to Avoid ‘Debt Trap’ Tip 01: Debt can be managed with the right mind set and discipline. Do not buy more than what you can afford. Do not get lured into ‘WANT’ items. Tip 02: Getting the maximum mortgage loan tenure does not necessarily mean we need to take as long to repay. Tip 03: Realize that credit cards should only be used to facilitate payment and not as a means to borrow money. Tip 04: Never treat credit cards as free money. Tip 05: Stop all the activities that result in debt. Change your lifestyle to accumulate more savings. Tip 06: Use a debit card instead of a credit card. It eliminates the risk of spending beyond your means. Tip 07: Spend within your means, buy things you can afford to pay.
Sukanya Samrudhi Yojana •Objective: To promote the welfare of the girl child. •Who can open the account: A natural or legal guardian on behalf of a girl child where child's age is 10 or less. •Maximum number of accounts: Up to two girl children, or three in case of twin girls as second birth, or the first birth itself results in three girl children. •Tax deduction: As applicable under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961. •Premature Closure: Allowed in the event of death of the depositor or on compassionate grounds such as medical support in life threatening diseases and is authorized by an order of the Central Government of India. •Irregular payment/ Revival of account: By payment of penalty amount •Mode of Deposit: Cash/Cheque/Demand Draft/digital payment •Withdrawal: A certain portion of the balance lying in the account as at the end of previous financial year for the purpose of higher education and marriage after attaining the age of 18 years.
Stand up India • Scheme for financing SC/ST and/or Women Entrepreneurs above 18 years of age. • Objective is to facilitate bank loans to the above mentioned target groups. • Purpose of loan is for setting up a new enterprise in manufacturing, trading or services sector.
List of Government Schemes to Empower Women in India
Mudra Yojana
The Mudra loan scheme is a government initiative in India aimed at promoting entrepreneurship and providing financial support to micro and small enterprises. The scheme has a special focus on women entrepreneurs, as it aims to empower and promote women's entrepreneurship in the country. Mudra loans for women are also available on easy terms and conditions, with no collateral required for loans up to ₹10 lakhs. The scheme also offers lower interest rates to women entrepreneurs, making it a lucrative option for those looking to start or expand their businesses.
Stand-Up India Scheme
The Stand-Up India Scheme is a government scheme that aims to promote entrepreneurship among women and other marginalized communities. It provides bank loans to at least one scheduled caste (SC) or scheduled tribe borrower and at least one woman per bank branch for the establishment of a greenfield business. In the case of non-individual firms, a SC/ST or woman entrepreneur must possess at least 51% of the ownership and majority stake. Under this scheme, women entrepreneurs can get a loan ranging from ₹10 lakh to ₹1 crore to start or expand their small business.
Mahila Coir Yojana
Mahila Coir Yojana (MCY) intends to empower women by providing spinning equipment at reduced prices following proper skill development training. Under this scheme, women entrepreneurs can get a subsidy of up to 75% of the cost of equipment and machinery for coir processing. The scheme also provides a margin money subsidy of up to 25% of the project cost. The scheme is available to rural women artisan who are above 18 years of age and has completed a training programme in coir yarn spinning at any of the Coir Board's training institutes.Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE). The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and the Ministry of MSME introduced the initiative to provide collateral-free financing to the micro and small enterprises. Both existing and new enterprises are eligible to be covered under the scheme, for which a Trust named Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) has been established to provide credit facilities up to ₹ 200 lakh per eligible borrower covered, provided they are extended on the project viability without collateral security or third-party guarantee. The extent of guarantee cover is 85% for Micro and Small Enterprises being operated and/or owned by women; while other borrowers get up to 75%. Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP). Udyam Shakti Portal. It was launched by the Ministry of MSME for promoting social entrepreneurship by creating low-cost products and services. It offers assistance with business planning, incubation facilities, training programs, mentorship, market research, and more. Projects with a maximum cost of ₹25 lakhs are eligible for the scheme, with ₹10 lakhs allocated specifically for service-based projects. The initiative's online portal has played a significant role in empowering women beyond the confines of their homes.Economic Empowerment of Women Enterprises and Start-up by Women. It is a Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurs scheme that provides an incubation and acceleration programme for female micro entrepreneurs to launch new businesses and scale up existing ones. The initiative is now operational in the states of Assam, Rajasthan and Telangana. Trade-Related Entrepreneurship Assistance and Development (TREAD). This initiative aims to economically empower women by providing finance (through NGOs), training, development, and counselling expansion activities linked to trades, goods, and services, among other things. Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) get assistance in the form of a grant from the Government of India (GoI) of up to 30% of the total project cost, as determined by the lending agency, to promote entrepreneurship among target groups of women. The remaining 70% of the project cost is financed by the lending agency as a loan for carrying out the activities outlined in the project.
Few initiatives taken by the government are highlighted as follows: Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling Centres (FLCC): In order to spread the financial inclusion in the country, the government of India establishes FLCC to give free financial literacy/education in the country. Beti Bachao, Beti padhao Yojana- This is a Government of India scheme that aims to generate awareness and improving the efficiency of welfare services meant for women. Sukanya Samridhi Yojana (Girl Child Prosperity Scheme)-The scheme primarily ensures equitable share to a girl child in resources and savings of a family in which she is generally discriminated as against a male child. This would ensure the financial support to females which will encourage the financial literacy as well. Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana- One of the biggest steps taken by government to enhance the financial inclusion in the country is the launch of PMJDY. It is a national mission on financial inclusion encompassing an integrated approach to bring about comprehensive financial inclusion of all the households in the country. Objective of “Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY)” is ensuring the access to various financial services like availability of basic savings bank account, access to need based credit, remittances facility, insurance and pension to the excluded sections i.e. weaker sections & low income groups. This deep penetration needs financial literacy among the people. Hence, special arrangements are being made by the government for spreading financial knowledge so that financial inclusion can be made possible. Establishment of NCFE- The National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE), has been set up to implement National Strategy for Financial Education (NSFE), under the guidance of a Technical Group on Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC), which would cater to all sections of the population in the country. It comprises of the representatives from all financial sector regulators i.e. Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and National Institute of Securities Markets (NISM). The main role of NCFE is to create financial education materials and conduct financial education campaigns across the country for all sections of the population along with awareness campaigns at different levels for existing and potential customers so as to improve their knowledge, understanding, skills and competence.
Hindrise Social Welfare Foundation, a financial inclusion NGO, is facilitating financial inclusion by creating awareness about financial literacy for women via education, joining hands with the private players, and circulating the information about the financial services that all the beneficiaries must get for sure. By giving priority to the financial inclusion method, we won't let discrimination happen in the society concerning banking and financial services, and thus, we ensure that these services should reach everyone's door irrespective of the economic status of families.
The six key habits for financial fitness are mentioned below - Splitting savings from spending, Always keep your emergency funds ready ,Go for sensible insurance, Build, spend, save and borrow formulas, Balanced financial diet, Give money to equity exposure  


